---
title: 2025 Goals
date: 2025-01-01
tags: ["goals", "okrs"]
categories: ["goals"]
---

Last year I used the [CGP Grey Theme System](https://www.themesystem.com/) by
declaring 2024 the "Year of Externalization". The idea was simple: to get
information out of my mind and onto physical media more often. While it was
successful, it was a bit too vaguely defined with no real measurable aspects.

As I just finished reading John Doerr's "Measure What Matters", this year's set
of goals will follow the OKR format. These OKRs build some on what I started in
2024, but mostly provide quantitative results. At the end of each quarter, I'll
revist these on this website to check-in on my progress toward their completion.

Without further ado, here are my three objectives for 2025:

## O1: Become a better writer

I used to write more docs in my day job but haven't done as much recently. Thus
one of my key focuses is to improve my technical writing and to write more.

1. **Publish 50 posts on this blog.** The most important step is to simply start
   writing more. The easiest way to do that would be to write a new post here
   every week. However, missing one week due to a lack of potential content
   would kill the momentum. Instead, the focus here is to simply get 50 posts
   published here in total, regardless of even perodicity. And yes, this post
   counts as the first one.
2. **Read 12 books.** I read a lot of news articles and listen to quite a few
   podcasts. To become a better writer, I should also read more long-form
   writing. This goal works out to a book each month. This will be tracked via
   Goodreads.
3. **(Work) Write 12 design docs.** This is the real meat of the objective. As
   I'm now a senior engineer, I am expected to write more docs. A target of 12
   fully fleshed out technical design docs should be reasonable. Note that this
   does not include quick one-pagers, design proposals, and other related docs.
4. **(Work) Read 50 design docs.** To get better at writing design docs, one
   needs to learn from other design docs.

## O2: Continue improving my health and fitness

In 2024 I made large strides on sustainably improving my health and fitness. I
intend to continue this trend throughout 2025.

1. **Get below xx.x% body fat.** While weight is easy to track, body fat
   percentage gives a better overall indicator of fitness but is much harder to
   track. I have a baseline from a scan and will be using a smart scale to get
   an approximation on progress until the next scan. And no, I'm not posting the
   actual target nor my starting percentage.
2. **Walk 3,500 kilometers.** This year I walked/ran over 3,000 km and burned
   through several pairs of shoes in the process. For 2025, I intend to push
   this a bit further to 3,500 km. This may not count treadmills because of GPS.
3. **Journal daily.** Following my 2024 goal of externalization, I've come to
   learn more of the importance of daily journaling. Thus the goal is to journal
   most, if not all, days in 2025.

## O3: Improve my personal education

Learning is one of the most fulfilling things one can do and I fully intend to
be a lifelong learner.

1. **Write C++, Rust, Kotlin, and Starlark.** I've been doing a lot of Go and
   some TypeScript code recently. I've been neglecting the other langauges I
   should be fully versed on. Thus this year, the goal is to write usable
   executables (even if only for personal use) in C++, Rust, and Kotlin. I also
   intend to become more familiar with Starlark/Bazel and to start using them on
   my own projects.
2. **Refresh linear algebra.** Linear algebra is key to the AI/ML wave that is
   taking the tech industry by storm. As an infrastructure engineer, I want to
   better understand how AI/ML works. Thus I need a strong grasp of linear
   algebra.
3. **Finish a class or course on AI/ML.** As stated in O3KR2, I want to better
   understand how AI/ML works. Thus taking a class or course in AI/ML should
   help give me a more structured point from which I can dive into this field.
4. **Achieve A1 proficiency in a secondary language.** I've dabbled in numerous
   languages (Spanish, German, Japanese, Esperanto, French, etc.). It would be
   better if I can achieve equivalence, or certification, of A1 (or equivalent)
   or higher in at least one of them.
5. **Learn common chords, progressions, scales, and modes.** I've been writing
   music for years, but much of the time I go by what sounds good. I may know
   some of the most common chords and progressions, but it would be good to
   familiarize myself with the subject matter as taught in music theory.

I'll post updates to these objectives around the end of Q1.
